








         SWFPut -- Flash Video Player Plugin for WordPress


                    Ed Hynan <edhynan@gmail.com>


              This  `README'  serves as the main documenta-
         tion for the SWFPut WordPress plugin, and  as  the
         conventional `README' as well.



    1.  What is it?

         SWFPut  is  a  plugin  for the popular WordPress weblog
    software. It provides a video player program for  the  flash
    plugin  and  the means to configure an instance with a video
    source and playback attributes.  There are two separate com-
    ponents:  the  flash  video player, and the WordPress plugin
    proper.  The video player is delivered to site  visitors  by
    the  plugin  in  the traditional <object ...> block with the
    necessary arguments. Flash video objects may  be  placed  in
    posts  and  pages,  or in the widget areas supported by your
    theme (i.e., the plugin includes a widget).  Video is placed
    in posts and pages with a shortcode; if you do not know what
    a shortcode is, or do not want to deal with them, that's  no
    problem.  (In fact, it is preferable that the shortcodes not
    be hand-edited, and they will not  be  discussed  in  detail
    here.)  The  plugin  adds  to the administrative interface a
    full featured form to setup and  add,  or  edit,  or  delete
    video objects, so the user does not need to be troubled with
    shortcodes (they will be visible in the editor; you will get
    used  to  them).   The flash video widget has a similar full
    featured form.

         The plugin does not require  JavaScript  in  non-mobile
    browsers, although it is used for scaling if available. If a
    mobile browser is detected JavaScript is necessary, but this
    is  not  expected  to be a problem as disabling scripts in a
    mobile browser is probably uncommon and impractical.

         (Note that the SWFPut video player has  been  coded  to
    work well with the free Gnash web browser plugin, as well as
    the closed binary-only proprietary version  in  common  use.
    As  of  this  writing, Gnash does not handle MP4 files well,
    even though it handles H.264 video and AAC audio if they are
    in an FLV container file.)













                                 -2-


    2.  Building From the Source

         SWFPut  is  distributed  as  a ZIP archive prepared for
    installation on a WordPress site with  the  "Add  New"  item
    under  the  "Plugins"  menu.  Therefore, there is no need to
    build the package before use.

         (You may skip forward to the Usage section if you don't
    intend to modify the player or plugin.)

         The   actual  plugin  is  composed  of  PHP  code,  and
    JavaScript for the administrative parts and front-end  scal-
    ing, and neither of those requires compilation or link edit-
    ing.  The flash video player  is  a  compiled  program,  but
    binaries are included in the installable package so that use
    does not require compilation by the  user.  Of  course,  the
    source  code  is  included  and the binaries may be built if
    necessary (or desired). Compiling  the  flash  program  will
    require  the  Ming  PHP  extension.  See the files Makefile,
    mingtest/mingput.php, and  mingtest/mainact.inc.php  if  you
    wish to learn to build the player.

         If  you  wish  to  change  the  JavaScript  code,  edit
    js/*.dev.js, rather than js/*.js.   The  latter  are  merely
    `minified' versions of the former; see Makefile.

         This  file  (README*)  is built with the GNU roff groff
    with ms macros; see docs/Makefile.

         The Makefiles require a Unix-like or POSIX system.  The
    default  target builds as necessary and then creates the ZIP
    file.

    3.  Usage

         A logged in session is assumed.

         SWFPut installed will add an item under the  "Settings"
    menu  named  "SWFPut  Plugin". Selecting that should produce
    the plugin's configuration  page.   The  configuration  page
    includes  optional  verbose  help,  and  so  it  will not be
    described here.

         When editing posts or pages, below the editor the plug-
    in will have placed an interactive form with the title "SWF-
    Put Flash Video Shortcode".  Directly under the title  is  a
    row  of  buttons.  Under the row of buttons, the bulk of the
    form is placed in three sections entitled  "Media",  "Dimen-
    sions", and "Behavior".  The title bar of each section has a
    button that will hide or show that section, which might help
    if the height of the form is greater than that the display.












                                 -3-


         3.1.  Form Buttons


         o    Fill  form  from  editor:  When the post (or page)
              already  contains  a  SWFPut  flash  video  object
              (i.e., shortcode), this will find it in the editor
              and fill the form with its details.   A  post  may
              contain  any  number  of  SWFPut video objects. If
              there is more than one, then repeatedly using this
              button will cycle through each in turn.

         o    Replace  current in editor: When the form has been
              filled with the details of a  video  object  using
              "Fill  form  from editor" (described above), or if
              it contains the details of a new video object that
              has  just  been  added,  the  form  items  may  be
              changed, and this button will edit the  associated
              shortcode (video object) with the changes.

         o    Delete  current  in editor: As described above for
              "Replace current in editor",  except  that  rather
              than  changing the details of the shortcode, it is
              deleted.

         o    Place new in editor: After making  sure  that  the
              cursor  (insertion  point) in the editor is at the
              desired position, and setting the form items,  use
              this button to add a new shortcode (video).

         o    Reset  default  values:  Except  for the "Caption"
              text field, all form items are set to default val-
              ues,  or  cleared.  It  is assumed that text typed
              into the "Caption" field  would  be  better  main-
              tained by hand, so that field is not cleared.


         3.2.  Form Sections


         3.2.1.  Media

         o    Caption:  A  video  object  is set in a page as an
              image would be,  with  the  same  border,  and  an
              optional  caption,  which may be set here. If this
              field is left blank, there will be no caption.

         o    Url or media library ID: A fully qualified URL may
              be  given  here,  or an ID valid for the WordPress
              database.  Or more conveniently, this field may be
              set  from  the two drop-down lists described next.
              Acceptable protocols are HTTP,  HTTPS,  and  RTMP.
              Support for RTMP is only partial and very limited.
              See  "Playpath  (rtmp)"  below.  Acceptable   file
              (media)  types  are  FLV,  MP4  (video),  and  MP3









                                 -4-


              (audio)1.

         o    Url  from  uploads  directory: This is a drop-down
              list from which the  "Url  or  media  library  ID"
              field  may be set. The WordPress uploads directory
              is searched recursively for files  with  the  suf-
              fixes  FLV,  MP4,  and  MP3, and for each a URL is
              placed in this list.  This has the advantage  that
              it will find files added by hand (rather than with
              the `add media' interface) if they are  placed  in
              uploads or a directory under it.

         o    Select  ID from media library: This is a drop-down
              list from which the  "Url  or  media  library  ID"
              field  may  be  set, as above, with the difference
              that it searches the WordPress media database, and
              presents the suitable filenames their media IDs.

         o    Medium  is  audio:  To  determine  whether to play
              video or audio, the file suffix of the  medium  is
              checked.   If  the  file  suffix is not known, the
              medium is assumed to be video. If the medium is an
              mp3  audio file, but it does not have the MP3 suf-
              fix, check this.

         o    URLs for alternate HTML5 video: An optional series
              of  URLs for an alternate HTML5 video element that
              a web browser can try if flash video is not avail-
              able or is not supported.  If more than one URL is
              given, they should be separated by the `|'  (pipe)
              character.  Each  individual  URL  may be appended
              with an argument for the `type' attribute  of  the
              video  element,  separated  from  the URL by a `?'
              character (do not include the `type' keyword; give
              only  the  value that should appear between quotes
              in the type argument, and although many web  exam-
              ples  show  a space after the comma separating the
              video and audio codec  names,  Firefox  up  to  at
              least version 16 will reject the source because of
              the space, so it should be left  out)2.   If  more
              than  one is given they will appear in order.  The
              browser should use the first type that it supports
              (if any, and some older versions of browsers might
    -----------
      1 For MP3 files, you may try placing a video URL
    in  the "Playpath (rtmp)" field to play along with
    the audio. If the video has an audio stream,  that
    will mix in, so it should probably be a video only
    file. This is an experimental and unsupported fea-
    ture.
      2 For example:
    foo/alternate.mp4?video/mp4|            foo/alter-
    nate.webm?video/webm;           codecs=vp8,vorbis|
    foo/alternate.ogv?video/ogg; codecs=theora,vorbis.









                                 -5-


              not consider any source but the first to  appear).
              The  MP4,  WEBM, and OGG types have varied support
              among web browsers, so ideally all  three  formats
              should be provided.

         o    Playpath  (rtmp): If the "Url or media library ID"
              field is given an  RTMP  URL,  the  `playpath'  is
              given  here. Note that only the simplest RTMP con-
              nections are supported: those requiring  only  the
              playpath.

         o    Url  of  initial image file (optional): An HTTP or
              HTTPS URL for an image file may  be  placed  here.
              When  the  player  is  loaded, if it is not set to
              play on load, this image is  displayed  until  the
              play  button  is invoked. Accepted image types are
              JPEG, PNG, and GIF, and SWF3.

         o    Load image from uploads directory: This is a drop-
              down  list  from  which  the "Url of initial image
              file (optional)" field may be set.  The  WordPress
              uploads  directory  is  searched  recursively  for
              files with the suffixes listed as  acceptable  for
              that  field,  and for each a URL is placed in this
              list.  This has the advantage that  it  will  find
              files  added  by  hand  (rather than with the `add
              media' interface) if they are placed in uploads or
              a directory under it.

         o    Load  image ID from media library: This is a drop-
              down list from which the  "Url  of  initial  image
              file  (optional)" field may be set, as above, with
              the difference  that  it  searches  the  WordPress
              media  database,  and  presents the suitable file-
              names their media IDs.

         o    Use initial image as non-flash  alternate:  If  an
              initial  image  was  given, then also use it as an
              alternative display when flash is  not  supported.
              If optional HTML5 video URLs were given, they will
              remain the first alternate, and the initial  image
              will be an alternate to that. This option is on by
              default.





    -----------
      3 SWF files may be stills  or  animations.  This
    type is a flash program that the flash web browser
    plugin will be executing, so, of course,  it  must
    not  interfere  with the SWFPut player. Test thor-
    oughly if this is used.









                                 -6-


         3.2.2.  Dimensions

         o    Pixel Width x Height: set  these  to  the  desired
              size  of  the player's embedded window.  This does
              not need to be the same as the display size of the
              video  to  be  played,  but the appearance will be
              best if the aspect of the player's display is  the
              same as the display aspect of the video. For exam-
              ple, if set for a video with a  size  of  400x300,
              then setting these to fields to 320x240 would look
              good (the width:height ratio is the same). In  any
              case,  the  player  will  scale  the  video to fit
              within its display, but it  maintains  the  aspect
              ratio,  so  horizontal  or vertical black (unused)
              areas will be visible if the aspect ratios do  not
              match.

         o    Mobile  width:  This  is to provide a width to use
              only if a mobile browser is detected;  the  height
              is  automatically  proportional,  according to the
              regular "Pixel Width x  Height"  dimensions.  This
              might  be  used for widgets placed on the sidebar,
              because the sidebar might be placed below,  rather
              than  beside,  the main content. In this case more
              space might be available, and larger display might
              be suitable. This feature is disabled with a value
              of '0,' which is the default, and has no effect if
              the browser is not identified as being on a mobile
              platform.  (Note that this feature does not  over-
              ride the display scaling added in version 1.0.7 of
              SWFPut.)

         o    Auto aspect: This enables a feature  meant  to  be
              helpful  when  the  video  to be played might have
              been prepared as DVD-Video (NTSC or PAL) for stan-
              dard  (non-widescreen) 4:3 display. Such video has
              non-square pixels; i.e., its  actual  widthxheight
              does  not  match its intended display aspect. With
              this check enabled, the video  player  will  force
              display at 4:3 ratio if the video dimensions match
              one of the DVD-Video  pixel  sizes.  This  is  not
              suitable  for  widescreen DVD-Video, which has one
              of the expected  DVD-Video  pixel  sizes,  but  is
              meant to be displayed with a 16:9 aspect.

         o    Display  aspect:  Set  the intended display aspect
              ratio in this field if you know that the video has
              non-square  pixels.  A  value of 0 (zero) disables
              this field; otherwise, a value may be given  as  a
              decimal  number  (e.g.,  1.33333333) or as a ratio
              using `:' or `x' or `/' as separator  (e.g.,  4:3,
              or  16x9, or 20/11, etc.--several other characters
              will also be accepted as  a  separator,  but  it's
              sensible to use those listed here).









                                 -7-


         o    Pixel  aspect:  Similar to "Display aspect" above,
              but this field takes  the  source  (pixel)  aspect
              ratio  rather  than  the  display  aspect  in  the
              unlikely event that that  value  is  more  readily
              available.  For  example,  video prepared for NTSC
              DVD at 720x480 pixels intended for standard  (4:3)
              display  has  a  pixel aspect ratio of 8:9, and at
              352x240 a pixel aspect ratio of 10:11.  As  above,
              `0' disables this field.

         3.2.3.  Behavior

         o    Initial volume: The video player has a volume con-
              trol that visitors can adjust, but this field will
              set  a  default  volume.  If the web browser flash
              plugin is permitted to save values  locally  on  a
              visitor's  machine,  then their adjustment will be
              saved, and will be used rather  than  the  default
              when they visit again (or reload the page).

         o    Play on load: This will cause the video (or audio)
              to begin playing as soon as the player program  is
              loaded. When this is not set, the player waits for
              the play button.

         o    Loop play: This will  cause  the  medium  to  play
              again  from the beginning each time it ends.  When
              this is not set, the media plays  once,  and  then
              pauses.

         o    Hide  control  bar  initially: This will cause the
              control bar to hide a few seconds after the player
              loads  (e.g.,  so that it does not obscure an ini-
              tial image). Note that this also changes the  con-
              trol  bar  behavior  in general: the bar will show
              whenever mouse movement  is  detected  within  the
              embedded  window,  and  hide  again when there has
              been no mouse movement for a  few  seconds.   When
              this  is  not set, the control bar is left showing
              when the player loads, and  thereafter  is  always
              shown  when  the mouse is within the embedded win-
              dow, and  is  always  hidden  when  the  mouse  is
              detected  leaving  the  window  (when the mouse is
              moved out of the player window with  rapid  motion
              the browser plugin often fails to deliver a `mouse
              has left' event to the player program,  so  hiding
              the bar is not always reliable).

         o    Hide  and  disable control bar: Enable this if the
              media should play through without interruption.













                                 -8-


         o    Allow full screen: This enables a control bar but-
              ton that will place the video in full-screen mode.

         o    Control bar Height (20-50): The control bar height
              can be adjusted with this. Actually,  there  is  a
              fixed number precompiled sizes in the player bina-
              ries that are distributed with  the  package,  and
              this field causes the nearest size to be selected.
              If the WordPress host's PHP configuration includes
              the  Ming extension, then you may select an option
              on the SWFPut configuration page  called  "Dynamic
              SWF  generation".   This produces the video player
              on the fly, and in this case  the  value  of  this
              field builds the control bar at the requested size
              rather than using a near match.


    3.3.  The Widget

         The player can also be used as a widget.  The  "Appear-
    ance"  menu "Widgets" item should produce the "Widgets" page
    which, after installation of  SWFPut,  should  show  "SWFPut
    Flash  Video" under "Available Widgets". After dragging this
    to a widget area the setup form should  display  (click  the
    arrow  near  the  title if necessary). The widget's form has
    the  same  items  described  under  "Form  Sections"  above,
    although  this  form  is not displayed in the three separate
    sections and does not have the buttons near the top.   There
    is one additional item at the top of the widget form: a text
    field named "Widget title".  Not surprisingly, the  contents
    of  that field will be displayed as a title above the widget
    on the pages that include the particular widget area used.

    4.  License

         This program and all files included in the distribution
    archive  are  under  the  GNU  GPL, version 3.  See the file
    COPYING, which should be present in the top-level  directory
    of   the  distribution  archive;  or,  see  the  license  at
    http://www.gnu.org/licenses/.




















